cloud: update use-chat2query-api.md release chat2query v2 (#15319)
pingcap/docs: tidb-cloud/use-chat2query-api.md

>
> Each Chat2Query Data App has a rate limit of 100 requests per day. If you exceed the rate limit, the API returns a `429` error. For more quota, you can [submit a request](https://support.pingcap.com/hc/en-us/requests/new?ticket_form_id=7800003722519) to our support team.

In each Chat2Query Data App, you can find the following endpoints:

- Chat2Query v1 endpoint: `/v1/chat2data`
- Chat2Query v2 endpoints: the endpoints whose names starting with `/v2`, such as `/v2/dataSummaries` and `/v2/chat2data`

> **Tip:**
>
> Compared with `/v1/chat2data`, `/v2/chat2data` requires you to analyze your database first by calling `/v2/dataSummaries`, so the results returned by `/v2/chat2data` are generally more accurate.

### Get the code example of an endpoint

TiDB Cloud provides code examples to help you quickly call Chat2Query endpoints. To get the code example of a Chat2Query endpoint, perform the following steps:

1. In the left pane of the [**Data Service**](https://tidbcloud.com/console/data-service) page, click the name of a Chat2Query endpoint.

    The information for calling this endpoint is displayed on the right side, such as endpoint URL, code example, and request method.

> 2. Click **Show Code Example**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Click **Show Code Example**.

```

You can call the `/v1/chat2data` endpoint directly to generate and execute SQL statements. Compared with `/v2/chat2data`, `/v1/chat2data` provides a faster response but lower performance.

TiDB Cloud generates code examples to help you call an endpoint. To get the examples and run the code, see [Get the code example of an endpoint](#get-the-code-example-of-an-endpoint).

When calling `/v1/chat2data`, you need to replace the following parameters:

- Replace the `${PUBLIC_KEY}` and `${PRIVATE_KEY}` placeholders with your API key.
- Replace the `<your table name, optional>` placeholder with the table name you want to query. If you do not specify a table name, AI will query all tables in the database.
- Replace the `<your instruction>` placeholder with the instruction you want AI to generate and execute SQL statements.

> **Note:**
>
> Each Chat2Query Data App has a rate limit of 100 requests per day. If you exceed the rate limit, the API returns a `429` error. For more quota, you can [submit a request](https://support.pingcap.com/hc/en-us/requests/new?ticket_form_id=7800003722519) to our support team.

> > API Key with the role `Chat2Query Data Summary Management Role` cannot call the Chat2Data v1 endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> An API Key with the role `Chat2Query Data Summary Management Role` cannot call the Chat2Data v1 endpoint.
```

Chat2Query API can only be accessed through HTTPS, ensuring that all data transmitted over the network is encrypted using TLS.

> **Note:**
>
> Chat2Query API is available for [TiDB Serverless](/tidb-cloud/select-cluster-tier.md#tidb-serverless) clusters. To use the Chat2Query API on [TiDB Dedicated](/tidb-cloud/select-cluster-tier.md#tidb-dedicated) clusters, contact [TiDB Cloud support](/tidb-cloud/tidb-cloud-support.md).

## Step 1. Create a Chat2Query Data App

To create a Data App for your project, perform the following steps:

1. On the [**Data Service**](https://tidbcloud.com/console/data-service) page of your project, click <MDSvgIcon name="icon-create-data-app" /> **Create DataApp** in the left pane. The data app creation dialog is displayed.

    > **Tip:**
    >
    > If you are on the **Chat2Query** page of your cluster, you can also open the data app creation dialog by clicking **...** in the upper-right corner, choosing **Access Chat2Query via API**, and clicking **New Chat2Query Data App**.

> 2. In the dialog, define a name for your Data App, choose the desired clusters as the data source, and select **Chat2Query Data App** as the Data App type. Optionally, you can also write a description for the App.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. In the dialog, define a name for your Data App, choose the desired clusters as the data sources, and select **Chat2Query Data App** as the **Data App** type. Optionally, you can also write a description for the App.
```

3. Click **Create**.

   The newly created Chat2Query Data App is displayed in the left pane. Under this Data App, you can find a list of Chat2Query endpoints.

## Step 2. Create an API key

Before calling an endpoint, you need to create an API key for the Chat2Query Data App, which is used by the endpoint to access data in your TiDB Cloud clusters.

To create an API key, perform the following steps:

1. In the left pane of [**Data Service**](https://tidbcloud.com/console/data-service), click your Chat2Query Data App to view its details on the right side.
2. In the **Authentication** area, click **Create API Key**.
3. In the **Create API Key** dialog, enter a description, and then select one of the following roles for your API key:

>    - `Chat2Query Admin Role`: allows the API key to manage data summaries, generate SQL statements based on provided instructions, and execute any SQL statements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - `Chat2Query Admin`: allows the API key to manage data summaries, generate SQL statements based on provided instructions, and execute any SQL statements.
```

>    - `Chat2Query Data Summary Management Role`: only allows the API key to generate and update data summaries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - `Chat2Query Data Context Management`: only allows the API key to generate and update data summaries.
```

Reviewer 2: ![image](https://github.com/pingcap/docs/assets/79440533/94d348ad-2b1d-4208-a703-8e7b2dd48682)

        > **Tip:**
        >
        > For Chat2Query API, a data summary is an analysis result of your database by AI, including your database descriptions, table descriptions, and column descriptions. By generating a data summary of your database, you can get a more accurate response when generating SQL statements by providing instructions.

>    - `Chat2Query SQL Generate & Execute (ReadOnly) Role`: only allows the API key to generate SQL statements based on provided instructions and execute `SELECT` SQL statements.
>    - `Chat2Query SQL Generate & Execute (ReadWrite) Role`: allows the API key to generate SQL statements based on provided instructions and execute any SQL statements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - `Chat2Query SQL ReadOnly`: only allows the API key to generate SQL statements based on provided instructions and execute `SELECT` SQL statements.
   - `Chat2Query SQL ReadWrite`: allows the API key to generate SQL statements based on provided instructions and execute any SQL statements.
```

In each Chat2Query Data App, you can find the following endpoints:

- Chat2Query v1 endpoint: `/chat2data`
- Chat2Query v2 endpoints: the endpoints whose names starting with `/v2`, such as `/v2/dataSummaries` and `/v2/chat2data`

> **Tip:**
>
> Compared with the Chat2Query v1 endpoint `/chat2data`, the Chat2Query v2 endpoint `/v2/chat2data` requires you to analyze your database first by calling `/v2/dataSummaries`, so the results returned by `/v2/chat2data` are generally more accurate.

### Get the code example of an endpoint

TiDB Cloud provides code examples to help you quickly call Chat2Query endpoints. To get the code example of a Chat2Query endpoint, perform the following steps:

1. In the left pane of the [**Data Service**](https://tidbcloud.com/console/data-service) page, click the name of a Chat2Query endpoint.

    The information for calling this endpoint is displayed on the right side, such as endpoint URL, code example, and request method.

> 2. Click **Code Example**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Click **Show Code Example**.
```

            "description": "This table represents the user data and includes the date and time when each user was created.",
            "key_attributes": [ // Key attributes of table "user"
                "user_id",
            ],
            "primary_key": "id",
            "table_name": "users", // Table name in the database
        }
    },
    "entity": { // Entities abstracted by AI
        "users": {
            "attributes": ["user_id"],
            "involved_tables": ["users"],
            "name": "users",
            "summary": "This table represents the user data and includes the date and time when each user was created."
        }
    },
    "org_id": 30061,
    "project_id": 3198952,
    "short_summary": "Comprehensive finance data for analysis and decision-making.",
    "status": "done",
    "summary": "This data source contains information about companies, indexes, and historical stock price data. It is used for financial analysis, investment decision-making, and market research in the finance domain.",
    "summary_keywords": [
        "users"
    ],
    "table_relationship": {}
}
```

#### 3. Generate and execute SQL statements by calling `/v2/chat2data`

> When the data summary of a database is ready, you can call `/v2/chat2data` to generate and execute SQL statements by providing the data summary ID and your instructions as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the data summary of a database is ready, you can call `/v2/chat2data` to generate and execute SQL statements by providing the data summary ID and your question as follows:
```

        "0": {
          "clarified_task": "count the users", // Task that AI understands
          "description": "",
          "columns": [ // Columns that are queried in the generated SQL statement
            {
              "col": "user_count"
            }
          ],
          "rows": [ // Query result of generated SQL statement
            [
              "1"
            ]
          ],
          "sequence_no": 0,
          "sql": "SELECT COUNT(`user_id`) AS `user_count` FROM `users`;",
          "task": "count the users",
          "task_id": "0"
        }
      },
      "time_elapsed": 3.854671001434326
    },
    "status": "done"
  }
}
```

#### (Optional) 4. Update a data summary for better results of `/v2/chat2data`

If you want to improve the results of `/v2/chat2data` for a database, you can check and update the data summary of this database.

1. To get the data summary of a database, call the `v2/dataSummaries/{data_summary_id}` endpoint in the GET method.

    ```bash
    curl --digest --user ${PUBLIC_KEY}:${PRIVATE_KEY} --request GET 'https://<region>.data.dev.tidbcloud.com/api/v1beta/app/chat2query-<ID>/endpoint/v2/dataSummaries/{data_summary_id}'\

>      --header 'content-type: application/json'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    --header 'content-type: application/json'
```

        "id": 481235,
        "name": "data-context",
        "org_id": 30061,
        "type": "data", // Type of data summary, which is `data`
        "updated_at": 1699518950
      }
    }
    ```

2. To update the data summary of a database, call the `v2/dataSummaries/{data_summary_id}` endpoint in the PUT method. Currently, you can update the table descriptions and column descriptions in the summary.

    ```bash
    curl --digest --user ${PUBLIC_KEY}:${PRIVATE_KEY} --request PUT 'https://<region>.data.dev.tidbcloud.com/api/v1beta/app/chat2query-<ID>/endpoint/v2/dataSummaries/{data_summary_id}'\
     --header 'content-type: application/json'\
     --data-raw '{
      "tables": {
            "<table_name>": {
                "description": "<New table description you want to set>",
                "columns": {
                    "<column name>": "<New column description you want to set>"
                }
            }
      }
    }'
    ```

    In the preceding example, the request body is a JSON object with the following properties:

    - `<table_name>`: _string_. The table you want to update.

>     - `table_name.description`: _string_. The new description you want to set for the given table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - `<table_name>.description`: _string_. The new description you want to set for the given table.
```

>     - `<tables_name>`: _string_. The table you want to update.
>     - `tables_name.description`: _string_. The new description you want to set for the given table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - `<table_name>`: _string_. The table you want to update.
    - `table_name.description`: _string_. The new description you want to set for the given table.
```

>     - `columns`: a key-value pair to specify the target column and the column description you want to update.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - `tables_name.columns`: a key-value pair to specify the target column and the column description you want to update.
```

      "code": 200,
      "msg": "",
      "result": {
        "ended_at": 1699523242,
        "job_id": "103d0bf8d8564ec7b2c768d3180d8ab1",
        "result": null,
        "status": "done"
      }
    }
    ```

    When the `status` is `done`, the job is finished, and the descriptions of tables and columns are updated.

### Call the Chat2Data v1 endpoint

TiDB Cloud Data Service provides the following Chat2Query v1 endpoint:

|  Method | Endpoint| Description |
|  ----  | ----  |----  |
|  POST | `/chat2data`  | This endpoint allows you to generate and execute SQL statements using artificial intelligence by providing the target database name and instructions.  |

You can call the `/chat2data` endpoint directly to generate and execute SQL statements. Compared with `/v2/chat2data`, `/chat2data` provides a faster response but lower performance.

TiDB Cloud generates code examples to help you call an endpoint. To get the examples and run the code, see [Get the code example of an endpoint](#get-the-code-example-of-an-endpoint).

When calling `/chat2data`, you need to replace the following parameters:

- Replace the `${PUBLIC_KEY}` and `${PRIVATE_KEY}` placeholders with your API key.

> - Replace the `<your instruction>` placeholder with the instruction you want AI to generate and execute SQL statements.
> - Replace the `<your table name, optional>` placeholder with the table name you want to query. If you do not specify a table name, AI will query all tables in the database.

Reviewer: 颠倒了下顺序，和界面保持一致。
```suggestion
- Replace the `<your table name, optional>` placeholder with the table name you want to query. If you do not specify a table name, AI will query all tables in the database.
- Replace the `<your instruction>` placeholder with the instruction you want AI to generate and execute SQL statements.
```

> **Note:**
>
> Each Chat2Query Data App has a rate limit of 100 requests per day. If you exceed the rate limit, the API returns a `429` error. For more quota, you can [submit a request](https://support.pingcap.com/hc/en-us/requests/new?ticket_form_id=7800003722519) to our support team.

> > API Key with the role `Chat2Query Data Context Management Role` cannot call the Chat2Data v1 endpoint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> API Key with the role `Chat2Query Data Summary Management Role` cannot call the Chat2Data v1 endpoint.
```

> The following code example is used to count how many users are in `sp500insight.users` table:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following code example is used to count how many users are in the `sp500insight.users` table:
```

5. Click the **Data Service** link in the message to access the Chat2Query API.

>     You can find that the **Chat2Query** [Data App](/tidb-cloud/tidb-cloud-glossary.md#data-app) and its chat2data [endpoints](/tidb-cloud/tidb-cloud-glossary.md#endpoint) are displayed in the left pane.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    You will be directed to the [Data App](/tidb-cloud/tidb-cloud-glossary.md#data-app) page. On the page, you can find the **Chat2Query** Data App and a list of endpoints under the App.
```

## Step 2. Create an API key

Before calling an endpoint, you need to create an API key. To create an API key for the Chat2Query Data App, perform the following steps:

1. In the left pane of [**Data Service**](https://tidbcloud.com/console/data-service), click the name of **Chat2Query** to view its details.
2. In the **Authentication** area, click **Create API Key**.
3. In the **Create API Key** dialog box, enter a description and select a role for your API key.

>    - `Chat2Query Admin Role`: allows the API key to management data summary, generate sql from a question, execute any SQL statement

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - `Chat2Query Admin Role`: allows the API key to manage data summary, generate SQL statements according to instructions, and execute any SQL statements.
```

>    - `Chat2Query Data Context Management Role`: only allows the API key to generate, update and delete data summary

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - `Chat2Query Data Context Management Role`: only allows the API key to generate, update, and delete data summary.
```

>    - `Chat2Query SQL Generate & Execute (ReadOnly) Role`: can generate sql from a question, but only allows the API key to execute SELECT SQL statement

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - `Chat2Query SQL Generate & Execute (ReadOnly) Role`: allows the API key to generate SQL statements based on provided instructions and execute  `SELECT` SQL statements.
```

>    - `Chat2Query SQL Generate & Execute (ReadWrite) Role`: can generate sql from a question, but only allows the API key to execute any SQL statement

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - `Chat2Query SQL Generate & Execute (ReadWrite) Role`: allows the API key to generate SQL statements based on provided instructions and execute any SQL statements.
```

        - Replace the `${PUBLIC_KEY}` and `${PRIVATE_KEY}` placeholders with your API key.

    > **Note:**
    >
    > Each Chat2Query Data App has a rate limit of 100 requests per day. If you exceed the rate limit, the API returns a `429` error. For more quota, you can [submit a request](https://support.pingcap.com/hc/en-us/requests/new?ticket_form_id=7800003722519) to our support team.

The following code example is used to explore `sp500insight` database:

```bash
curl --digest --user ${PUBLIC_KEY}:${PRIVATE_KEY} --request POST 'https://<region>.data.dev.tidbcloud.com/api/v1beta/app/chat2query-<ID>/endpoint/v2/dataSummaries'\
 --header 'content-type: application/json'\
 --data-raw '{
    "cluster_id": "10939961583884005252",
    "database": "sp500insight"
}'
```

In the preceding example, the request body is a JSON object with the following properties:

- `cluster_id`: _string_. A unique identifier of the TiDB cluster.
- `database`: _string_. The name of the database.

The response is as follows:

```json
{
  "code": 200,
  "msg": "",
  "result": {
    "data_summary_id": 481235,
    "job_id": "79c2b3d36c074943ab06a29e45dd5887"
  }
}
```

> The api is an async api, we should poll the job results in get job api by each 5 seconds until the job been successed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The API is asynchronous. You can pull the job results in the GET job API every 5 seconds until the job succeeds.
```

```bash
curl --digest --user ${PUBLIC_KEY}:${PRIVATE_KEY} --request GET 'https://<region>.data.dev.tidbcloud.com/api/v1beta/app/chat2query-<ID>`/endpoint/v2/jobs/{job_id}'\
 --header 'content-type: application/json'
```

```json
{
  "code": 200,
  "msg": "",
  "result": {
    "ended_at": 1699518950, // when the job finished, it's UNIX timestamp
    "job_id": "79c2b3d36c074943ab06a29e45dd5887",  // ID of current job
    "result": DataSummaryObject, // see the definition bellow
    "status": "done" // status of the current job
  }
}
```

> `DataSummaryObject` represents AI explored infomation of the given database, here is the structure of `DataSummaryObject`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`DataSummaryObject` represents AI explored infomation of the given database. The following is a structure example of `DataSummaryObject`:
```

                }
            },
            "description": "This table represents the user data and includes the date and time when each user was created.",
            "key_attributes": [ // key attributes of table "user"
                "user_id",
            ],
            "primary_key": "id",
            "status": "done", // generation status
            "table_name": "users", // table name in database
        }
    },
    "entity": { // entities abstract by AI
        "users": {
            "attributes": ["user_id"],
            "involved_tables": ["users"],
            "name": "users",
            "summary": "This table represents the user data and includes the date and time when each user was created."
        }
    },
    "org_id": 30061,
    "project_id": 3198952,
    "short_summary": "Comprehensive finance data for analysis and decision-making.",
    "status": "done",
    "summary": "This data source contains information about companies, indexes, and historical stock price data. It is used for financial analysis, investment decision-making, and market research in the finance domain.",
    "summary_keywords": [
        "users"
    ],
    "table_relationship": {}
}
```

> **Get data summary result using data summary id in anytime**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Get the data summary result using the data summary ID.**
```

```bash
curl --digest --user ${PUBLIC_KEY}:${PRIVATE_KEY} --request GET 'https://<region>.data.dev.tidbcloud.com/api/v1beta/app/chat2query-<ID>/endpoint/v2/dataSummaries/{data_summary_id}'\
 --header 'content-type: application/json'
```

The response is as follows:

```json
{
  "code": 200,
  "msg": "",
  "result": {
    "created_at": 1699518862,
    "creator": "",
    "data": DataSummaryObject, // see the definition of DataSummaryObject
    "id": 481235,
    "name": "data-context",
    "org_id": 30061,
    "type": "data", // type of data summary, it's `data` for data summary
    "updated_at": 1699518950
  }
}
```

> **Update data summary result using data summary id when you have an better result**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Update data summary result using data summary ID when you have a better result.**
```

```bash
curl --digest --user ${PUBLIC_KEY}:${PRIVATE_KEY} --request PUT 'https://<region>.data.dev.tidbcloud.com/api/v1beta/app/chat2query-<ID>/endpoint/v2/dataSummaries/{data_summary_id}'\
 --header 'content-type: application/json'\
 --data-raw '{
  "tables": {
        "<table_name>": {
            "description": "<New table description you want to set>",
            "columns": {
                "<column name>": "<New column description you want to set>"
            }
        }
  }
}'
```

In the preceding example, the request body is a JSON object with the following properties:

- `<tables_name>`: _string_. The table you want to update
- `tables_name.description`: _string_. The new description you want to set for the given table
- `columns`: a Key-Value represent the columns and descriptions you want to update

The response is as follows:

```json
{
  "code": 200,
  "msg": "",
  "result": {
    "job_id": "103d0bf8d8564ec7b2c768d3180d8ab1"
  }
}
```

You can query the job detail by running:

```bash
{
  "code": 200,
  "msg": "",
  "result": {
    "ended_at": 1699523242,
    "job_id": "103d0bf8d8564ec7b2c768d3180d8ab1",
    "result": null,
    "status": "done"
  }
}
```

> when the `status` is `done`, the job had finished and description of table and columns had been updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the `status` is `done`, the job is finished and the descriptions of the table and columns are updated.
```

> **Next we generate sql using chat2data v2 endpoints**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Generate SQL using the chat2data v2 endpoints**
```

```bash
curl --digest --user ${PUBLIC_KEY}:${PRIVATE_KEY} --request POST 'https://<region>.data.dev.tidbcloud.com/api/v1beta/app/chat2query-<ID>/endpoint/v2/chat2data'\
 --header 'content-type: application/json'\
 --data-raw '{
  "data_summary_id": <Your data summary id>,
  "raw_question": "<Your question to generate data>"
}'
```

In the preceding example, the request body is a JSON object with the following properties:

- `data_summary_id`: _string_. A unique identifier generated by create data summary api above.
- `raw_question`: _string_. A natural language describing the query you want.

The response is as follows:

```json
{
  "code": 200,
  "msg": "",
  "result": {
    "job_id": "3966d5bd95324a6283445e3a02ccd97c"
  }
}
```

> The api is an async api, we should poll the job results in get job api by each 5 seconds until the job been successed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The API is asynchronous. You can pull the job results in the GET job API every 5 seconds until the job succeeds.
```

```bash
curl --digest --user ${PUBLIC_KEY}:${PRIVATE_KEY} --request GET 'https://<region>.data.dev.tidbcloud.com/api/v1beta/app/chat2query-<ID>/endpoint/v2/jobs/{job_id}'\
 --header 'content-type: application/json'
```

```json
{
  "code": 200,
  "msg": "",
  "result": {
    "ended_at": 1699581661,
    "job_id": "3966d5bd95324a6283445e3a02ccd97c",
    "result": {
      "question_id": "8c4c15cf-a808-45b8-bff7-2ca819a1b6d5",
      "raw_question": "count the users", // the original question you gave
      "task_tree": {
        "0": {
          "clarified_task": "count the users", // task that AI understands
          "description": "",
          "columns": [ // query result columns of generated SQL
            {
              "col": "user_count"
            }
          ],
          "rows": [ // query result of generated SQL
            [
              "1"
            ]
          ],
          "sequence_no": 0,
          "sql": "SELECT COUNT(`user_id`) AS `user_count` FROM `users`;",
          "task": "count the users",
          "task_id": "0"
        }
      },
      "time_elapsed": 3.854671001434326
    },
    "status": "done"
  }
}
```

## Step 4. Call the Chat2Data v1 endpoint

> You can call chat2data v1 endpoint directly get sql generated result. this api will give a faster response but lower performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can call the chat2data v1 endpoint directly to get the SQL generated result. This API will give a faster response but with lower performance.
```

2. In the dialog box, select the cluster and database that you want to use to call the endpoint, and then copy the code example.
3. Paste the code example in your application and run it.

   - Replace the `${PUBLIC_KEY}` and `${PRIVATE_KEY}` placeholders with your API key.
   - Replace the `<your instruction>` placeholder with the instruction you want AI to generate and execute SQL statements.
   - Replace the `<your table name, optional>` placeholder with the table name you want to query. If you do not specify a table name, AI will query all tables in the database.

> **Note:**
>
> Each Chat2Query Data App has a rate limit of 100 requests per day. If you exceed the rate limit, the API returns a `429` error. For more quota, you can [submit a request](https://support.pingcap.com/hc/en-us/requests/new?ticket_form_id=7800003722519) to our support team.
> API Key with the role `Chat2Query Data Context Management Role` cannot call the Chat2Data v1 endpoint.

> The following code example is used to count how many users in `sp500insight.users` table:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following code example is used to count how many users in the `sp500insight.users` table:
```
